# Project Synopsis

Researching how population density affects marine organisms like Hemigrapsus oregonensis is important for understanding species-specific consequences of anthropogenic modifications to coastal environments. Changes in organisms' abundance can impact their viability, persistence and risk of extinction. In this study, stress response in  H. oregonensis was evaluated using indicators such as mortality, injury (limb loss), righting time and metabolic rate over 90 minutes, which served as a proxy for recovery from prolonged stress. Metabolic rate is a well established indicator of physiological stress and energy expanditure in organisms, while righting, which requires muscle coordination and neurological control, can signal well-being and health.
Three experimental conditions were tested: crowded (high density), uncrowded (low density), and uncrowded with water from the crowded condition. Physical consequences of crowding, such as limb loss and mortality, occurred only in the crowded conditions. Metabolic rates were similar in the crowded and uncrowded treatments, but reduced in the uncrowded + crowded water condition. This suggests that while chemical stressors present in the water (such as ammonia, changes in salinity or chemical cues) may influence physiological stress, phyisical crowding remains a source of harm to the crabs. These results highlight the importance of chemical and physical aspects of stress inintertidal species that are subjected to a reduction of habitat availability.
